Each year, Gospel and Life offers a daily devotional during the season of Lent.
The 40 days from Ash Wednesday through Good Friday.
You can sign up to receive these daily devotionals by email at gospelandlife.com.
That's gospelandlife.com.
Now here's Dr. Keller with today's teaching.
We're spending a couple of weeks on the passage that you've got written out for you.
in the bulletin, 1 Peter chapter 1 verses 13 to 21.
And I'm going to read again, like I did last week, just the first part, 13 to 16.
Therefore, prepare your minds for action.
Be self-controlled.
Set your hope fully on the grace to be given you when Jesus Christ is revealed as obedient children
Do not conform to the evil desires you had when you lived in ignorance.
But just as He who called you is holy, so be holy in all you do, for it is written, be holy because I am holy."
Excuse me, this is God's Word.
What we looked at last week was just a definition of holiness.
That's all.
We didn't have much time.
Next week, this week and next week and the following week, we're going to look at how that plays out, because this is all about holiness and what it means to be holy.
And we said that Peter, when he quotes this verse, be holy for I am holy.
He's pulling something out of the book of Leviticus.
There's a number of places where Leviticus says, where God says in Leviticus, be holy for I am holy.
And the word used there, the Hebrew word used there, kadosh means
to be separated, to be set apart.
And therefore, this word holy, when it refers to God and refers to human beings, it's both the same and yet it's obviously different.
When we talk about God being holy, we mean he's set apart.
He's set above us.
He's off the scale.
He's transcendently above us.
He's not like us.
He's infinitely exalted above us.
But when we talk about human beings being holy,
The word set apart has a different aspect to it.
We mean that we are set apart for God's use.
To be holy means to be holy is.
So let me give you an example.
Here you are reading the newspaper and you read it and it's all for your information.
You read 20 articles, 30 articles and you get through it and it's all helpful to you.
But suddenly you come upon one particular article
that you want to use.
It's an article that really has something in it.
You want to use it because you're writing something.
You're writing some copy.
You're writing a paper for a class.
You're preparing a talk.
You're doing a sales pitch or something.
So you say, I need that.
Now, when you need something, what do you do with it out of the newspaper?
You cut it out.
You separate it from the newspaper so that it's yours.
He won't be of use to you if you don't separate it from the rest of the paper, so it's with you and it's for your use.
When the Bible talks about holiness, it's saying the very same thing.
What it means to be holy is to be cut out.
It means to be separated.
It means to be set apart for God's exclusive use.
And that's why last week we said holiness is a lot, lot, lot more than just simply obeying a set of rules.
It's to be in mind.
and in will and in heart, and in every way, it means to be holy gods.
It means to belong to God is exactly what it means.
Just like, you know, here's your newspaper and you cut something out, so it's yours and you set it apart.
That's what it means to be holy.
It means to be completely at the disposal of God.
It means to put yourself completely in his hands.
It means to want that, to want to be used.
You know, what's
I mentioned this at the end of the four o'clock service, but I didn't mention it this morning.
There was a, the last hymn that we sang in the morning service, we rest on thee, our shield and our defender.
Interesting historical note is that the six missionaries in the early 1950s who went, sought to go to Ecuador and they sought to contact a very primitive tribe.
They wanted to meet the tribe, they wanted to learn their language,
They wanted to give them the written language.
This was an illiterate tribe and they wanted to put the language down on paper so that they could teach them to read and write and to translate the Bible into their language.
In the night before these six missionaries went to contact the Indians, they sang this hymn all together.
We rest on thee, our shield and our defender.
We go not forth alone against the foe.
Strong and nice strength, safe in thy keeping tender.
We rest on thee, and in thy name we go.
Strong and I strengthen, safe and like keeping tender.
And the next day they were all spirited death by the Indians.
So I guess the hymn didn't work.
I guess the Christian faith didn't work.
We know the wife of one of those missionaries, Elizabeth Eliot, she's been here to speak.
And she often refers to the fact that this particular hymn was sung by them the night before.
We rest on thee.
We want to put ourselves in your hands.
So they were all spirited at.
Does that mean that it didn't work?
No, because you see, what does it mean to be holy?
It means to say to God, use me.
When I know I'm going, I know I'm at work.
We're on a collision course with modern culture.
I know that.
We're on a collision course.
We can handle the idea of knowing God sometimes, can't we?
Oh yeah, we wanna know God, that's great.
We wanna experience His love, that's great.
Even the idea of obeying God.
Well, you can sort of get into that.
There's design, there's rules.
Okay, I can do that, but this is beyond the rules.
What it means to be holy means to be cut out, to be with God so that God can use you.
To be holy means to say, use me Lord, use even me in any way
And of course, they were used.
They were mightily used.
They were martyrs.
Not exactly the way you had in mind, right?
When you sing that hymn.
But you know, we rest on thee.
Jesus, our righteousness, our sure foundation, our prince of glory, our king of love.
Yes, in thy name, O captain of salvation, in thy dear name, all other names above.
That's what it means to be holy.
It means to finally say,
I'm not mine anymore.
I'm bought with a price."
All right.
Now, having said that, somebody says, who needs this?
You need this because, believe it or not, we're built for this.
Now, once you get that down, you begin to realize that holiness is not easy at all.
It's not like obeying the rules.
It's not like obeying the regulations.
holiness is getting yourself mind, will, and emotions to belong to God.
That's the reason why the English word holy, the English word holy doesn't mean separate, separated, cut out, the way the Hebrew word means.
I think the English word holy, of course, is though also helpful because it comes from the word to be whole, to be completely God's.
So to be holy means to make yourself holy gods.
What does that mean?
It means to take every part of you, the whole person, and that's why tonight, next week, and the next week, I wanna talk about the different aspects of our lives.
What it means to be holy is not just obey the rules, but to give him your mind holy, to give him your will holy, and to give him your heart holy.
Now tonight, let's just take a look and we'll see that as soon as Peter says, I want you to be holy, he starts the section out by saying,
Gird up the loins of your mind.
Now, I know that's not what it says in your translation.
It says, therefore, prepare your minds for action and be self-controlled.
But these first two phrases is what we're going to look at tonight.
Because these first two phrases tell us that you can't be holy unless you prepare your minds for action, unless you let your minds belong to God.
What does this term mean?
Now, I mentioned this last week, but now we'll get into it a little bit more.
The actual Greek, if it was translated literally, it would be almost incomprehensible to modern people, because literally it says, gird up the loins of your mind.
Now what that means, as I think I alluded to last week, is in those days, people in the Greek or Roman world, people, men and women were long robes, and if you wanted to do something that was strenuous, if you had a run or if you had to do some evasive action or something very hard,
you would gird up the loins, which means your gird, the girdle, the girdle was, this belt.
There was a belt around your waist, and what you would do is you'd pick up your flowing robes and you'd stick them in the girder around your loins.
So that basically your legs were free, and in many cases your arms were free, and so you're ready for action.
The closest thing we'd have in a modern idiom would be roll up your sleeves, you know, get ready.
But it doesn't just say gird up the loins.
It says gird up the loins of your mind.
And the word that's used here is dia noia.
Dia is a Greek word for through.
It's the word diameter, the meter that goes through, the center of the circle.
Dia means through.
And noia has to do with noose, means has to do with the mind.
And so it literally means to think through rationally.
There's a couple places in the Bible where it means
to debate.
So, for example, the same word shows up in Hebrews 12 where it says, let the Word of God de anoia you, let it debate with you.
It's a very, very interesting word.
It literally means to think things something through, to summons up all of your rational powers, all of your capacities for thought and reflection and consideration, all of the logic that you can muster.
It's a word that's used, it would include both induction and deduction.
You see, if you ever watch these great murder mysteries that BBC puts out, Sherlock Holmes and Agatha Christie mysteries, you have all the facts.
But you can never, if it's a good plot, you can't figure it out.
Why?
Because the good murder mystery writers give you solutions to the murder mystery which are rational but counterintuitive.
In other words, a really good murder mystery.
You have all the clues yourself.
In a good murder mystery, you're baffled till the end, even though you have all the clues yourself, but you just weren't able to think through the clues.
You were following your hunches.
You were following your prejudices.
You were following your intuition, but the great sleuth, whoever, thinks through.
And when it's all done, you read the end of the book and you say, why didn't I see that?
Of course I could have seen that.
I didn't think through.
I didn't summons up all of my rational faculties.
That's the word that Peter uses.
And what it means is that you can't be a Christian, you can't be holy unless you use your mind.
It's critical that you be able to think.
You know, there's a place in Romans, Romans chapter 10, verse 2, and where Paul says about some Christians, he says, I bear witness to them that they have zeal, but without knowledge.
Isn't that interesting?
They have zeal, but without knowledge.
What he's saying is they have a lot of enthusiasm for the Lord.
A lot of enthusiasm, they don't think.
And that's a criticism.
You see, heat without light, no good.
Enthusiasm, but not rational, not thinking.
There's one, John Mackay once said, commitment without reflection is fanaticism.
Reflection without commitment.
is paralysis.
You can deal with that knowledge, knowledge without zeal, no good.
You've got to use the mind.
Now I know this doesn't seem like something that many people believe.
In fact, I go so far as to say that the average person in Manhattan is shocked if they hear you a believing Christian, reflective and thoughtful, they're amazed.
The average person in Manhattan believes
that if you're educated, if you're thoughtful, if you're rational, and so on, you wouldn't believe.
Most people in Manhattan think that Christianity is for people who don't want to use their mind.
It's not for thinkers.
In fact, if you're going to be a Christian, you've got a jettison, your thought.
You have to jettison your rationality.
You have to jettison your capacities for thought and reflection.
You have to get rid of them.
And you sort of surrender yourself into the realm of feeling, and you take this leap of faith.
If you say to somebody here, and you sound like you've reasoned it out and you sound thoughtful and rational about it, and you say, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, preexisting, Son of God, who was, who came to earth and was born of a virgin and lived a perfect life and died to pay the debt for us.
And now he was physically raised from the dead.
And now he sits at the right hand of the Father.
And when we believe in him, he pardons our sins and he puts the Holy Spirit in us so that we experience the new birth.
And someday he's going to come back
And we will all see him, and he will bring about judgment of all human beings, and he will inaugurate the New Heavens and the New Earth, and they look at you and they can't believe it.
Because the typical person in New York says, look, I know there's still people that believe that.
Members of the proletariat, the oppressed working classes and the poor people, they've been kept away from knowledge and enlightenment, you see, and it's not their fault.
If they want to yell hallelujah, that's fine.
But you've gone to college, you should know better.
And this attitude, this utterly paternalistic attitude is a complete misconception of Christianity.
I want to show you what Peter says here and what it says all the way through the Bible is not only may Christians think and use their mind, but Christians must think.
Christianity, let me just tell you two things this evening, and this is the first one which I've already gotten into.
The first thing is Christianity requires you to use your mind
It requires you to think.
It requires you to summons up all of your rational capacities.
It requires and demands and encourages it and stimulates it.
Not just here, not just here.
For example, thinking is fundamental to becoming a Christian.
If you look further on in the chapter, chapter 1, verse 22, it says, you have purified yourselves by obeying the truth.
Verse 23, it says, you're born again, not by imperishable seed, but by the living and during word of God.
There's another passage like it.
It's in Romans 6, 17.
It says, but though you were servants of sin, you obeyed from the heart the form of teaching which was delivered to you.
Now, all of those texts say this.
Being a Christian, becoming a Christian, being born again is more than just thinking, but not less.
You have to grasp the form of teaching.
You have to understand the gospel.
It has to be something that you grasp and you see you have to think with.
You're born again, through what?
Through receiving the word, a form of teaching, a system of doctrine.
Oh, of course, it says, obeyed from the heart, the form of teaching.
That's how you became a Christian.
Well, there's the whole person.
You obey, that's the will from the heart, you see?
The form of teaching.
But, but how wrong it is
for people to think that Christianity is basically emotional or volitional.
Oh no.
It's rational as well.
It's fundamentally rational.
Say, there are all kinds of churches, friends, fundamentalist churches.
What does that mean?
Churches that are legalistic, that are authoritarian, they put all the stress on the will.
They say, just don't think.
Just do whatever I tell you to do.
Don't think.
Hear the rules.
Do them.
Don't think.
Just obey whatever I tell you.
Don't read the Bible for yourself.
Don't work it out.
Don't think it out.
Just do what I say.
There's a lot of churches like that.
But on the other hand, the liberal churches are just as anti-intellectual.
There's a Unitarian church down in Murray Hill I went by and there was an interesting plaque up and it said, we are a group of people who all work hard to love people and be compassionate and to work for a better city.
And it doesn't matter what you believe.
We don't care what you believe.
We don't care what you think, as long as you do good deeds.
That's what it says on the plaque.
Now, besides the fact that that's absolutely contradictory.
I mean, why would you do good deeds unless you believe that human beings were dignity and were worth doing good deeds for?
I mean, that's silly.
And science isn't going to tell you that.
Science is going to tell you it's your bag of chemicals.
I mean, that's a religious belief.
And so it sounds really nice to say, we don't care what you believe.
That's ridiculous.
They do care what you believe.
But you see what they're saying?
It doesn't matter what you believe.
It doesn't matter what you think, just what you do.
That's as anti-intellectual as the fundamentalist.
Doctrine doesn't matter.
Studying the Bible doesn't matter.
Figuring out what it teaches doesn't matter.
On the other hand, you have a lot of high churches, churches that put all the emphasis on ritual.
And they, too, they say, well, you believe this, you believe that.
Doesn't matter, the point is the ritual.
And so you get caught up in this aesthetic experience.
And all the people love it because of the music and because of the architecture and because of the, in some ways, the glamour of it, the aestheticness of it.
It's all the emphasis is on the emotion.
The sermon is five to seven minutes long and everybody sleeps through it.
We don't care about thinking, it's the feeling.
And then there's a lot of other evangelical churches that are put all the emphasis on the feeling, all the emphasis on the catharsis, all the emphasis on the emotion that you feel it.
My dear friends, the Bible says to become a Christian engages the emotions and engages the will, but it also engages the mind just as fundamentally.
You can't be a Christian unless you think.
You can't grow as a Christian unless you think.
You can't grow in holiness unless you gird up the loins of your mind.
fundamental.
Let me give you another example of how.
So the first thing is, I said Christianity demands that you think even to become a Christian.
Secondly, faith is really an exercise in thinking as well.
A lot of people say, well, you have faith, but I'm a rational person.
Let me tell you.
C.S.
Lewis gives you a great example of how faith really operates.
Lewis says, let's just say you have to go to a doctor.
So you study
everything you can to find out about that doctor.
You talk to people who have been to the doctor.
So you say, hey, here's a doctor and she is a good doctor, but I want to find out about her.
So what you do is you go and you talk to a number of people and they're all say, oh, she's great.
I've been to her and I ached and I pained and everything and now I'm all better.
And then you talk to other doctors and you find out she is the leader in the field.
And then you study the charts or you study the history and you were able, you probably have to break into illegally into files to find this out.
And she's never lost a patient.
So what have you done?
You've thought it through.
You rationally have come to see that the evidence is that she's a very good doctor.
But on the day that you have to get there, on the day you have to go, on the day you have to report to the hospital, on the day she has to cut you open,
It's the last minute you panic and you run and you decide I'm not going to go through it.
What happened?
You lost faith.
Well, does this mean you lost faith because you started to reason?
You started to think?
Huh?
Is faith the opposite of reason and thinking?
Absolutely not.
You lost faith because you stopped thinking, because you stopped reasoning, because you stopped looking at the evidence and you listened to your emotions and you listened to your fears.
It's silly to think that faith is the opposite of reason.
Why is there so much pain and suffering in the world?
And how do we handle it in a way that won't destroy us, but could actually make us stronger, wiser, and more hopeful?
All month long on Gospel and Life, Tim Keller is teaching from the book of 1 Peter, and looking at how Peter encouraged early believers who were facing intense suffering and pain.
In his book Walking with God Through Pain and Suffering,
Dr. Keller takes a deeper look at how, with God's help, we can face life's most intense challenges and confront the hard questions on suffering.
Through deep pastoral insight and real life stories, Dr. Keller explores how we can face pain and suffering in our own lives.
This month, walking with God through pain and suffering is our thank you for your gift to help Gospel and Life share the message of Christ's love and compassion with people all over the world.
So request your copy today at gospelandlife.com.
Now here's Dr. Keller with the remainder of today's teaching.
You know, here's a good quote.
You know, the passage, the famous passage we used it in the confession of sin this morning, Matthew 6, where Jesus says, if you're worried, have no anxiety but think about the lilies of the field.
God takes care of them.
Think, have no anxiety but think about the birds of the air.
takes care of them, oh ye of little faith," he says.
If God takes care of the birds and the grass and you're more valuable than they, won't he take care of you?
What is Jesus doing?
He says, oh ye of little faith, you're not thinking.
He doesn't say, if you want to have faith, stop thinking and just believe that's not faith.
That's not what the Bible calls faith.
Look, David Martin Lloyd-Jones in his great sermon on this passage, here's a quote from him.
He says, Jesus Christ,
insists that the whole trouble with people of little faith is they do not think.
They don't gird up the loins of their minds, see?
They allow circumstances to bludgeon them.
Think about this.
They allow their feelings to collar them.
Now, the Bible is full of reasoning.
We must never think of faith as something purely mystical.
Faith progresses through thinking, Jesus tells us.
Jesus says, look at the birds.
Think about them.
Draw your deductions.
Look at the flowers.
Do the same.
That is the essence of worry.
Instead of letting reason control your thoughts, other things have controlled them, and you go round and round in circles.
That is not thinking.
Worry is the absence of thinking.
Unbelief is the absence of thinking.
And for a Christian, a lack of faith is a failure to think.
Throw it up the loins of your mind.
Not only that, the Bible tells you that you can't grow in holiness unless you're willing to let God take over your thinking.
It says in Ephesians 4, 22 to 24, be renewed through the renewal of your mind.
That's the place where it says, put off the old self, put on the new and be renewed in the renewal of your mind.
Now, please listen carefully to this.
You can't bifurcate this.
Jesus Christ demands all of you.
And what this means is many of us come to Christianity
wanting something emotional, wanting something personal.
And we've already got ideas made up about things.
We have cultural ideas, ideological ideas, ideas about how things ought to be.
And we're desperately afraid that if we come to Christianity, it might change our minds.
And we wouldn't want any of that thing to happen.
We want the happiness, we want the joy, but we don't want anybody to change our minds.
What kind of religion are you thinking about?
Not Christianity.
Christianity is not a religion strictly of the feelings.
You have to grid up the lines of your mind.
You have to submit intellectually.
Jesus Christ has authority of you intellectually, not just personally, not just spiritually in some kind of way.
Look at it this way.
I'll put it this way.
To renew your mind, to have a holy mind means that you must read ideology and culture and opinion through a biblical grid rather than read the Bible through a cultural and ideological grid.
So let me just give you a couple of examples and just throw them out.
One of the things that I found interesting about working when I did as a teacher at Westminster Seminary was that it was a very multi-ethnic body, and about 15 to 20% of the students were Korean.
Now one of the things we found, especially with a couple of my Korean students and Korean friends, was, and most of the Korean students that I had were from Korea.
They had flown from Seoul to America,
And so they were immersed in their own Korean culture.
We found out that when a Korean reads the words, obey your parents.
And when an American reads the words in the Bible, obey your parents, we can come away with two completely different understandings.
Why?
Because though I'm a Christian, I'm an American and I am steeped in Western individualism.
I am steeped in secular individualism.
And so I read, obey your parents, and I think I know what it means.
But I'm immediately reading it through my grid.
And here's a Korean, and even though my Korean friend might be a Christian, just like I'm a Christian, I'm steeped in Western individualism, he or she might, though a Christian might be steeped in the collectivist Confucian culture of Korea.
And one of the things that we slowly came to understand, when you, this is one of the great advantages of doing multicultural Bible studies, you know, you study the thing and you get totally different things out of the text and you say, what?
and you begin to realize what you're doing.
After a while, you begin to realize that if you really read what the Bible says, the Bible is not really a very Eastern or a very Western book.
And the biblical understanding of parental authority really is not as authoritarian as the Korean nor is it as wimpy as the American.
You have the American wimpy parental model where you sort of sit with the children and say, oh, you hit me.
Did that feel good?
How did that make you feel?
Should we talk about it?
That's right.
And then you have the Korean parental medal.
Oh, you hit me off with his head, upstairs.
Now listen, come to realize after a while how hard it is to immerse yourself so much in the scripture that you start to let the scripture become a grid in your mind by which you can read your own culture.
It takes a long time, but it mainly takes it to start with an act of the will and a willingness to submit your reason and submit your thinking to the Word of God and immerse your mind in it.
One person says, a renewed mind is a trained, informed, equipped mind, equipped to sift the data through a framework of reference in your mind made up of biblical truths about the value and the nature of God, of human nature, of good and evil, of truth, authority and so on.
Do you know what it's like to do that?
Real quickly, I hate to criticize this article.
I read an editorial last Sunday, I think it was, in The New York Times, and it was really a good article.
So I hate to pick one bone with it, but it's an awfully good example of what I'm trying to say now.
Anna Quinlan wrote an op-ed piece, and in it she quotes from Stephen Carter's new book, The Culture of Disbelief.
And in that book, what she was saying is that there's a yawning spiritual vacuum
in the lives of American people.
And she says, we liberals have been fighting for individual rights for years, and now we're realizing, she says, that people need to feel that they're connected to something bigger than themselves.
And this is what she, there's two quotes from the article.
One is she says, we err when we presume that religious motives and religious sentiments are likely to be unliberal.
And then she says, we liberals must acknowledge this, that while the rights of the individual are precious,
at some deep level.
Individualism alone does not suffice.
The discussion must continue of what morality means of how to fill the spiritual vacuum.
Now, here's the only thing I'm going to pick.
I'm really happy.
It was a great article.
I was really glad she wrote it.
But you see what she's saying?
She's trying to say to all of her liberal friends, she says, you know, maybe it's good for us to get more religious.
Not that it'll change your mind on any of your positions.
You see, don't think that just because you become a Christian, you won't be a liberal.
Now, I'm not here to tell you what becoming a Christian makes you on the political spectrum, because frankly, it's very hard, I think, to put Christians on the spectrums, but I'll tell you this.
What kind of religion does she want?
A religion totally a feeling?
A religion totally a sentiment?
She says, you know, you can get spiritual and it not really change your mind on the things you've already made up your mind about.
There's a lot of religions like that.
Just don't come to Christianity.
Christianity says, you've got to be holy.
You have to be holy His.
You have to be willing to submit your mind.
You have to be willing to say, boy, that's going to be uncomfortable for me to change my view on that.
But is that what God actually teaches?
And if you think that God is going to deal with you emotionally and spiritually and volitionally, if you withhold yourself from Him intellectually, does it make any sense?
You've got to all come in or not come in.
I had an old teacher used to say, if you come to the door,
and knock on it, and I say, Tim, come on in, but Keller, stay out.
What are you gonna do?
It's pretty confusing.
And if you say, Lord Jesus, I want you to come in and have this part of me, what you're really saying is come in, save your stay out, Lord.
Oh, he never does that.
One more thing.
And last thing, but it's important.
Not only would I like to show you,
This is the last point.
The last point is not only does the Bible insist that to be a Christian, you've got to think.
To be a Christian, Christianity requires thinking, requires rationality, requires that, but not only that.
This will stimulate you, I hope.
I'd like to go so far so that it's the only thing in the world today that really does encourage thinking.
and reason.
It's the only thing that encourages, is the only thing that gives a basis for it.
Let me do this quick.
This is worth the end here.
There's only three basic worldviews you can have right now today.
There's been other worldviews, but there's only three basic philosophies of life that are out there.
You've got scientific materialism, which says that there is no soul, there is no supernatural, there is no God, there is no heaven and hell, and therefore everything is an accident.
And everything has a natural cause.
Now, these people will tell you, ultimately, that means that your mind's an accident.
And the thoughts you're having right now are just the chance reaction of molecules under your skull.
They're just bouncing off of each other.
And you believe what you believe strictly because of biological and chemical determinants.
And therefore, on the basis of that, there's really no reason for you to trust your thinking.
There's no reason for you to reason.
Everything is relative.
The last 30 years, people have been saying, because there is no truth.
We're free, our minds are free to think.
In the old days, we thought that there was a God and there was the Bible, and we thought that there was this and that, so we couldn't be free thinkers.
But now we know everything is relative.
There probably is no God.
There certainly is no Bible in Revelation.
So we're free, but you know what that leads to?
For about 30 or 40 years, people were saying, because all things are relative, therefore, because all morals are relative, therefore we shouldn't impose our values on each other.
But that doesn't make sense.
If all morality is relative, why not impose your values on other people?
That's just your value that says you shouldn't impose your value on other people.
You see, if there is no truth, don't you see that?
There is no basis for freedom of thought at all.
I'll control your thought if I want to.
You see, I'll do whatever I want.
The postmodern deconstructionists say, because all values are socially constructed.
There is no right and wrong.
The purpose of life is not to try to find out what is truth and what is justice and conform to it.
Absolutely not.
You do whatever the heck you want, which means that there is no search for truth.
There's no reason to reason.
There's no reason to think.
It's all power struggle.
Whoever has the power
Whoever comes out on top is the one who rules.
We don't find out what is right.
We don't find out what is wrong.
There is no right and wrong.
Don't you see scientific materialism leads to the death of thinking.
You don't need to think.
You can't trust your thinking.
That's the first basic philosophy you've got.
The second basic philosophy is Eastern monism, Eastern pantheism, Eastern religions.
You know what they believe about rationality, they believe.
And anyone will tell you this who understands the New Age and understands the Eastern religion.
is that they believe that what's wrong with us is that we think, that we're rational, that we reason.
Eastern meditation is after what they call, quote, pure awareness without thought, unquote.
Pure awareness without thought.
Eastern meditation says what you need to see is that it's all one, you're one with a tree, you're one with nature.
There is no individuality.
And Eastern thought tries to frustrate the reason, tries to frustrate your analysis, says that eventually we're all gonna go back into the all soul and there won't be individualism and there won't be individuals, there won't be personality, there won't be rationality, there won't be rationality, we'll all be one.
Eastern religion gives you no basis for rationality, but Christianity, or I should say the religion of the Bible, Judaism and Christianity and even Islam, which is based very much on the Bible, they believe, the religion of the Bible teaches that there was a God who created the world who was rational
And if there is a God who is rational, my reason is not an accident of molecules.
And my reason is not an illusion.
My reason is a reflection of his person.
And it means that if a rational and orderly God created the world, then when I use my reason, I'm going to find out what's really out there.
I can't go into this any further, but I want you to know that philosophically, at the end of the 20th century,
Christianity is the only thing in the world, the only thing in the world tonight that really encourages you to use your mind.
It's the only thing in the world tonight that gives you a basis for doing it.
And it's the only thing in the world that really liberates the thinking.
Ah, somebody says, what are you talking about?
I got out of Christianity because I thought I couldn't be liberated.
Now I can think of whatever I want to think about.
Let me tell you something.
The Bible says that you're not free unless you know the truth.
The truth will set you free.
And you know why?
Look at all the people who really understood the truth and said, the Bible is the truth.
That's freedom.
You know why?
No matter what your friends tell you, no matter what your political party tells you, no matter what the ideology tells you, no matter what the dictator or the king who's ready to cut your head off tells you, you know what's the truth.
Because you see, if you have the Bible, if you know there is an absolute truth, you could be the only person in the whole world.
It could be you against the entire world and you can know you're right.
Go look at Elijah standing before Ahab.
Look at Moses standing before Pharaoh.
Look at Paul standing before Herod Agrippa.
Look at Polycarp, you know, in ADAD, the old man standing in the Colosseum and they were about to throw him to the lions and he says away with you all and he dies.
Look at Latimer and Ridley being burned at the stake.
Look at Martin Luther standing before the whole world.
These were free thinkers.
because they knew, because they had submitted the truth, and now they had a standard by which they could judge any ideology.
They had a standard by which they could judge any philosophy.
They weren't the victims of their culture anymore.
They weren't the victims of their party.
They were always able to judge their own culture and their own party and their own philosophy and their own school.
I tell you, Christianity tonight is the only basis for being a free thinker.
It's the only basis.
and encouragement for actually using your mind.
And to conclude, if you don't believe it, let me tell you why.
If you let me tell you why Christianity stimulates the use of the mind.
I can private to you historically.
Wherever there's been revivals, great awakenings in the history of the world, you will see that the common people always receive the gospel.
You go back to the New Testament and it says the common people heard Jesus gladly.
Well, all the religious leaders thought that that proves that he couldn't be a great teacher.
Look at the common people like you.
The common people are following you.
And of course, all through the early church, they were all the common people.
They were the slaves.
They were the illiterates.
And what happened?
Their minds woke up.
The gospel always arouses the thinking.
And throughout the history of the church, throughout the history of the world, whatever the gospel has spread amongst people, their minds wake up and they want schools.
Look at Dartmouth, look at Princeton, you know where they came from?
There was a great awakening in this country, the 1730s, 40s and 50s, and the people who never cared about reading and writing.
When they became Christians, they said, I want to think, I'm a human being now, I'm not an animal anymore, I thought I was.
I want to think, I want to read, I want to write, and those were schools, started out of the revival.
The gospel always makes you gird up your mind, and you know why?
Because the gospel's not a teaching.
The gospel's not a philosophy that says, here, live in this way.
Just live in this way.
That doesn't make you think.
The gospel says, God has broken into the world in the form of Jesus Christ.
And Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and He died for us, and He was raised from the dead.
Don't you see?
You can't even listen to that teaching without it electrifying the mind.
It challenges the mind.
It shocks the mind.
It's not at all like a philosophy.
of how to live.
That doesn't stir up the mind.
The gospel stirs up the mind.
You can't even reject the gospel without using your mind because the claims are so incredible.
God has broken into history.
When the time had fully come, God sent His Son, born under the law, to redeem those under the law, that we might receive the full rights as sons of God.
That claim is so incredible that you can't even reject the gospel without thinking, because you've got to say, well, what's the evidence for the resurrection?
And how do I know these things?
And it's so stunning.
It's so challenging, because the gospel makes you think.
It wakes you up.
The gospel always makes you gird up the loins of your mind.
Have you done that?
Have you submitted your mind to him?
There's only two kinds of people here tonight, the one kind are the people who think that Christianity is something maybe that might help them privately, spiritually,
But they really are afraid to actually let it challenge their mind.
If Jesus is who He said He is, you must belong to Him wholly, intellectually, emotionally, and volitionally.
If he's the son of God, as he said, if he rose from the dead, as it was claimed, you have to look at that evidence.
You can't just say, well, I don't know what I think about all I think.
I just want to have a kind of personal mystical experience.
I just want to have peace.
You can't do it.
The Bible says, I will not.
God says, I will not come into your life unless I come in through your mind.
You have to receive the form of teaching.
You have to look at the evidence.
You have to believe it.
You have to check it out.
Don't you dare try to do it and run around the mind.
Listen to the gospel, let it argue with you.
And lastly, friends, some of your Christians, but you're not very consistent Christians because really you're, so many people come out of fundamentalist or come out of liberal or come out, all these different churches I told you and they all really do a bypass the mind.
Don't you dare, you need to study the word of God.
You have to let the word of God sink in.
You've got to let your mind be completely bathed in the authority of God.
Gird up the loins of your mind.
Let's pray.
Father, we ask that You would just enable us to do the very thing we've been looking at, to submit to You intellectually, to submit to You rationally, to submit every area of our lives to You that we might be holy Yours.
Enable us to do that now.
We ask it in Jesus' name.
Amen.
Thanks for listening to today's teaching from Tim Keller here at Gospel and Life.
For the 40 days from Ash Wednesday through Good Friday, Gospel and Life would like to email you a daily lint devotional.
You can sign up to receive these daily emails at gospelandlife.com.
That's gospelandlife.com.
Today's sermon was recorded in 1993.
The sermons and talks you hear on the Gospel and Life podcast were recorded between 1989 and 2017, while Dr. Keller was senior pastor at Redeemer Presbyterian Church.